Prediction is a central concept for
the data scientist.
In fact, we have an entire course,
Practical Machine Learning on
advanced prediction techniques.
However, regression and generalized
linear models which we're going to cover
later on in the class are some
of the most core techniques for
performing prediction they're.
they often produce very good predictions,
they're parsimonious and interpretable,
and as an added bonus
you can get inference
on top of your predictions without
doing any sort of data re sampling.
What I mean by inference is we can
get predictions, and then say for
example confidence intervals around our
predictions to evaluate the uncertainty in
those predictions, so that's very easy in
regression and pretty easy in generalized
linear models and quite difficult in some
more advanced machine learning algorithms,
you may have to do data resampling or
something like that.
So let's just talk about prediction,
we might want to predict a response,
which might be the price of a diamond.
At a particular mass, in carats.
Or we might want to predict
a child's height for
a particular value of the parent's height.
The obvious estimate in both
cases is just take our x not,
our predictor value that we want to
predict at, either mass or parents height.
Multiply it times the relevant
estimated slope, beta one half and
then add the intercept.
But, if we want to be good statisticians,
we need to evaluate some uncertainty in
that prediction, so, it would be
nice to have a prediction interval.
There's a small intricacy in that there's
a distinction between trying to predict
at the line.
Predict a regression line
at a particular point, and
trying to predict a future
Y at that same point.
Those are two different ideas.
I'll describe that picture in a slide,
but let me describe the formula first.
What we have here, and it makes
sense that our prediction variance
first relates around how variable.
The points are around our regression line,
sigma hat.
And it makes sense that, that will
be involved in our prediction error.
However here we have this term 1 over n.
Okay that, that also kind of makes sense.
Typically our,
our standard errors decrease at some rate,
1 over square root n.
So a 1 over n in a square root
seems kind of reasonable.
If we're predicting a new Y,
then we have this added 1 out front, so
we get a wider interval.
If we want to predict a new
value at a specific point versus
trying to predict what the regression
line is at that point.
So we'll talk more about that later, but
let me also focus on this very end
term that is on both equations.
X not minus X bar divided by the, sort of
variant, top of the variance of the Xs.
Consider the numerator of
this statistic our prediction
error is going to be the lowest
when X not is equal to X bar.
So our prediction variance
is going to be smallest
when we're predicting at
the average price of a diamond.
Or at the av, I'm sorry,
at the average mass of a diamond or
at the average height of the parents.
So that's one thing to notice.
The second is this summation X i minus
X bar squared in the denominator.
That's basically how variable my Xs are.
The more variable my Xs are,
the smaller this term becomes and
the lower my prediction error is.
So again, not unlike our slope estimate
where the more variable our reg,
regressors were,
the less variable our slope estimate is.
The same thing happens in
our prediction error here.
Okay, so let's go through some pictures so
we can try to solidify these concepts.
But this is an essential
part of using regression for
prediction, that you get easy,
and convenient
prediction on certainty associated
with your parsimonious predictors.
So let's generate some prediction
intervals for the diamond data set, and
I'm going to go through the code here,
and actually most of the code is just
a little bit of data wrangling to get
it in a format that's friendly for
'GG Plot', at least in so
far as I know 'GG Plot'.
So I'm not going to go
through this too carefully,
because after having had Roger's class
you're all better at this than I am.
So let me go through just the most
relevant part of this code and
that is the predict function.
Right here.
So here's my predict function, and
I am going to give to my predict function,
the output of LM.
For a lot of prediction algorithms,
especially linear models and
generalized linear models, but
other things, random forests and
other things in R, the predict function
is a generic method that applies to them,
so I'm going to give it the output,
in this case, my LM, and
then I want a nice denser grid
of x values to predict at for
my plot than the observed data, so I'm
going to give it some new x values, and
then here I tell you I want a confidence
interval, not a prediction interval,
that's R's Code for
saying I want the interval around
the estimated line at that
particular value of x not for
a potential new y at that particular
value of x, if I want an interval for
potential new Y at that
particular value of X,
I change the interval = ("confidence")
to interval = ("prediction").
Which I do in this line below.
So here I'm going to run all of
the sort of data wrangling code.
And then let me go through my ggplot.
I like to do this just because I find
ggplot a little bit confusing at first.
But once I've gotten used to it,
I like it quite a bit.
And once I've done this data wrangling,
then notice this some kind of complicated
plot only takes a couple of lines.
So I'm going to start my ggplot.
I'm going to add a ribbon, and the ribbon
is going to have two parts because it's
going to be filled by the interval type.
So the blue one will be
a prediction interval, and
the kind of salmon colored one
will be a confidence interval.
And then I want my fitted line added, and
then I want to add
the observed data points.
Now my observed data points aren't in
the data frame that I used to create
the ggplot, so I have to give it a new
data frame and a new aesthetic command for
this particular layer.
And then let me do my plot, and
then I'm going to switch windows
to a large window with a plot.
So here is my plot, and again, the blue
is the prediction arrow, this is for
predicting a new line, and
the salmon color is for
prediction of the line at
those particular values of x.
And so what you'll see is
the prediction for a line, a so
called confidence interval.
It, for the R command predict is much
narrower than the prediction interval.
And here's how I like to think of this.
Because if you're confused, and we know
this to be the case from the math, right.
There's that 1 plus.
For the prediction interval.
And there, that one is missing for
the confidence interval for the line.
So here's the way I like
to think about this.
Imagine if I collected
an infinite amount of data
at all different values
of x along this line.
Well, then, I would pretty much
know the regression line exactly.
And if that were the case,
I would be extremely confident
about predictions on the line, where
the line was at a particular x value.
So as I collected more and
more data, that salmon colored confidence
interval will get narrower and
narrower around the line to the point
where it was just the line itself.
And that's good, that's what we
would expect to ha, to happen.
That's just the idea of
statistical sampling working.
On the other hand, the prediction
interval, there's variability in the Ys,
that has nothing to do with how well I
estimated beta naught, or beta one, and
in fact, imagine if I were to just give
you the correct beta naught and beta ones.
There would still be
variability in the Ys,
because they're, there's that error term,
and so if I wanted to predict a new y,
there's some uncertainty that just
doesn't go away with better estimation,
it's sort of inherent in the,
in that I have a,
there's leftover residual
variation from my regression line.
So that variability will be ever
present in the prediction interval and
that's why it's one plus, that's why
that one shows up in the equation.
It doesn't go away with N.
It doesn't go away as I collect
more X's or anything like that.
It's inherent, and
that's why the prediction interval
has a certain amount of width
that's never going to go away.
The last thing I'd say is you can see it
probably I think a little bit more in
the confidence interval here than in the
prediction interval but that both of these
get narrower toward the center of the data
cloud and then get wider as you head,
head out into the tails and that's just
simply saying that we're more confident
In our predictions, close,
the closer we are to the mean of the X's.
Now because of that one plus it means
maybe less in the, for the blue color than
it does for the salmon color and you can
see it more clearly with the salmon color.
So that's why the, the, it pinches in
a little bit and, and that makes sense.
If we were to go well beyond where we
collected data, then these intervals would
really become a lot wider which
is what we'd want, because we're,
we would be extrapolating, we want to
predict where we did not collect data.
So on the next slide I just
summarized those points, but
I think that's enough to get you
started on inference from regression.
And now we'll move on to some more
complex topics in regression and
generalize to where we have
more predictor variables